Do Prompt-Based Models Really Understand
the Meaning of Their Prompts?
Albert Webson1,2 and Ellie Pavlick1
{albert_webson, ellie_pavlick}@brown.edu
1Department of Computer Science, Brown University
2Department of Philosophy, Brown University
Abstract
Recently, a boom of papers has shown ex-
traordinary progress in zero-shot and few-shot
learning with various prompt-based models. It
is commonly argued that prompts help models
to learn faster in the same way that humans
learn faster when provided with task instruc-
tions expressed in natural language. In this
study, we experiment with over 30 prompt tem-
plates manually written for natural language
inference (NLI). We ﬁnd that models learn
just as fast with many prompts that are inten-
tionally irrelevant or even pathologically mis-
leading as they do with instructively “good”
prompts. Further, such patterns hold even for
models as large as 175 billion parameters
(Brown et al., 2020) as well as the recently
proposed instruction-tuned models which are
trained on hundreds of prompts (Sanh et al.,
2021). That is, instruction-tuned models of-
ten produce good predictions with irrelevant
and misleading prompts even at zero shots. In
sum, notwithstanding prompt-based models’
impressive improvement, we ﬁnd evidence of
serious limitations that question the degree to
which such improvement is derived from mod-
els understanding task instructions in ways
analogous to humans’ use of task instructions.
1 Introduction
Suppose a human is given two sentences: “No
weapons of mass destruction found in Iraq yet.”
and “Weapons of mass destruction found in Iraq.”
They are then asked to respond 0 or 1 and receive a
reward if they are correct. In this setup, they would
likely need a large number of trials and errors be-
fore ﬁguring out what they are really being re-
warded to do. This setup is akin to the pretrain-and-
ﬁne-tune setup which has dominated NLP in recent
years, in which models are asked to classify a sen-
tence representation (e.g., a CLS token) into some
arbitrary dimensions of a one-hot vector. In con-
trast, suppose a human is given a prompt such as:
Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “Given that “ no weapons of mass destruction found
in Iraq yet.”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “”, is it deﬁnitely correct that “weapons
of mass destruction found in Iraq.”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”?”? 1 Then it would
be no surprise that they are able to perform the task
more accurately and without needing many exam-
ples to ﬁgure out what the task is.
Similarly, reformatting NLP tasks with prompts
such as the underlined text above has dramatically
improved zero-shot and few-shot performance over
traditional ﬁne-tuned models (Schick and Schütze,
2021b; Le Scao and Rush, 2021; Sanh et al., 2021;
Wei et al., 2021). Such results naturally give rise to
the hypothesis that the extra prompt text included
within each input example serves as semantically
meaningful task instructions which help models
to learn faster, in the way task instructions help
humans to learn faster. This hypothesis is implic-
itly assumed by many and explicitly argued by
Mishra et al. (2021), Schick and Schütze (2021a),
and Brown et al. (2020).
While last years saw a gold rush of papers (sum-
marized in §2) that proposed automatic methods for
optimizing prompts, Logan IV et al. (2021) com-
pare a representative sample of these newly pro-
posed methods and report that Schick and Schütze
(2021b)’s manually written prompts still on aver-
age outperform the automatically searched prompts
across a range of SuperGLUE tasks (Wang et al.,
2019). Such ﬁndings suggest that expert-crafted
prompts are among the best, if not the best, which
reinforces the above hypothesis that models beneﬁt
from meaningful instructions.
In this paper, we test this hypothesis by evaluat-
ing various language models on NLI in zero-shot
and few-shot settings using more than 30 manu-
ally written templates and 13 sets of LM target
words for a total of over 390 prompts. We ﬁnd
that in most cases models learn identically as fast
when given irrelevant or misleading templates as
1This prompt is adapted from MultiNLI (Williams et al.,
2018, p. 3)’s instructions to crowdsourced workers, while the
example is the ﬁrst one in RTE’s training set.
arXiv:2109.01247v2  [cs.CL]  21 Apr 2022\n\nthey do when given instructively good templates.
Further, models ranging from 235 million to 175
billion parameters all exhibit this behavior, as do
the instruction-tuned models, which are trained on
hundreds of manually written prompts. While we
conﬁrm Sanh et al. (2021)’s ﬁnding that instruction
tuning substantially improves the performance and
robustness of prompts, we also ﬁnd that instruction-
tuned models can be, in some sense, too robust
and less sensitive to the semantics of the prompts,
as compared to their non-instruction-tuned equiva-
lents. Finally, models are much more sensitive to
the choice of the LM target words as opposed to
the meaning of the instruction templates. In sum,
despite prompt-based models’ dramatic improve-
ment in zero-shot and few-shot learning, we ﬁnd
limited evidence that models’ improvement is de-
rived from models understanding task instructions
in ways analogous to humans’ use of task instruc-
tions.
2 Related Work
2.1 Prompt-Based Models
At the time of writing, the terms “prompt tuning”
and “prompting” can refer to any one or combina-
tion of three approaches described below:
Discrete Prompts reformat each example
with some template text. For example, in a
sentiment analysis task, the template can be
{sent} In summary, the restaurant
is [prediction] , where the predicted mask
word is then converted to a class prediction by
a predeﬁned mapping, e.g., {“great” → positive,
“terrible” → negative}. The prompts can be
manually written (Schick and Schütze, 2021a;
Bragg et al., 2021) or automatically generated (Gao
et al., 2021b; Shin et al., 2020). This approach
typically tunes all parameters of the model, but
its few-shot performance can exceed that of very
large models (e.g., GPT-3 175B) despite using a
3 orders of magnitude smaller LM (Schick and
Schütze, 2021b; Tam et al., 2021).
Priming (a.k.a. in-context learning) prepends
k priming examples to the evaluation example,
where each example is optionally wrapped in a
template such as Question: {sent 1} True
or false? {label 1} ... Question:
{sentk} True or false? {label k}
Question: {eval_sent} True or
false? [prediction] . Notably, although
models see labeled examples, their parameters
do not receive gradient updates based on those
examples. Although this approach is intriguing,
Brown et al. (2020) report that it only performs
well on the largest GPT-3 model, the API of which
is costly and difﬁcult to use for academic research
(see Appendix B for details).
Continuous Prompts prepend examples with
special tokens, optionally initialized with word em-
beddings; but during learning, those tokens can be
updated arbitrarily such that the ﬁnal embeddings
often do not correspond to any real word in the
vocabulary (e.g., Lester et al., 2021; Li and Liang,
2021; Qin and Eisner, 2021). This approach often
efﬁciently tunes a much smaller set of model pa-
rameters, but these methods have not yet reported
success in few-shot settings. Moreover, foregoing
prompts as expressed in natural language makes it
much harder to study their semantics, and it is not
clear if continuous prompts serve as task-speciﬁc
instructions or simply more efﬁcient model param-
eters (see He et al., 2021 for a detailed analysis).
2.2 Analyses of Prompts
In this paper, we focus on discrete prompts because
we can manually write and control their wording
and semantics. We measure the effect of prompt se-
mantics by the model’sk-shot performance where
k = {0, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256}. This setup re-
sembles that of Le Scao and Rush (2021), but their
study focuses on comparing Schick and Schütze
(2021b)’s existing small set of prompts against tra-
ditional ﬁne-tuning over the training trajectories of
entire training sets, whereas our study focuses on
the few-shot learning trajectories among a much
more diverse set of prompts designed to test spe-
ciﬁc hypotheses about the effect of prompt seman-
tics on few-shot learning speed.
At a high-level, our ﬁndings contradict Mishra
et al. (2021)’s claim that models beneﬁt from elab-
orate instructions adapted from crowdsourcing an-
notation guides. But note that they deﬁne “instruc-
tions” more broadly as including priming examples,
and they ﬁnd that “GPT-3 beneﬁts the most from
positive examples, mildly from deﬁnition, and de-
teriorates with negative examples.” (p. 18). In other
words, if we ablate priming and narrow “instruc-
tions” to just the description of a task, we in fact
have the same ﬁnding that instructions are only
modestly beneﬁcial over no instructions (cf. our
irrelevant templates). In a similar vein, concurrent
work by Lampinen et al. (2022) ﬁnds that other
2\n\ncomponents of a prompt such as explanations of
priming examples are helpful, but models are indif-
ferent to whether the instructions in fact describe
their tasks.
Finally, a growing body of concurrent work also
questions the degree to which models need mean-
ingful instructions (Khashabi et al., 2021; Prasad
et al., 2022). One particularly noteworthy ﬁnding
is that Min et al. (2022) show that models learn
just as well with incorrect labels as opposed to cor-
rect labels in priming, concluding that prompts are
helping models to learn the distribution of the input
text and space of possible labels (as opposed to
specifying instructions of the task).
3 Overall Setup
We implement a manual discrete prompt model 2
which in essence is the same as that of Schick and
Schütze (2021b), except their implementation in-
cludes several augmentations such as self-labeling
and ensembling of multiple prompts for compet-
itive results. In order to focus on measuring the
effect of prompts themselves, our implementation
does not include those augmentations. Following
Sanh et al. (2021) and Wei et al. (2021), we evalu-
ate by a rank classiﬁcation of the target words.
Baseline Model In preliminary experiments, we
ﬁne-tuned and prompt-tuned BERT, DistilBERT,
RoBERTa, ALBERT, and T5 (Devlin et al., 2019;
Sanh et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2020;
Raffel et al., 2020; all implemented via Wolf et al.,
2020). Conﬁrming prior work (Schick and Schütze,
2021b; Tam et al., 2021), we ﬁnd that ALBERT
consistently yields the best performance, so we use
it as our baseline model.
To verify that our implementation is comparable
with prior work, Figure 1 reports the RTE valida-
tion accuracy of our baseline model. At 32 shots,
our implementation yields a median accuracy of
70.22% (mean = 69.29%, std. dev. = 6.3%), which
is comparable to the 69.8% reported by Schick
and Schütze (2021b). Further, Figure 1 conﬁrms
Le Scao and Rush (2021)’s ﬁnding that, while both
ﬁne-tuning and prompt-tuning converge to sim-
ilar results when fully trained on the entire set
(n = 2490 for RTE), prompt-tuning yields the
largest improvement in the few-shot setting. Go-
ing forward, we focus on studying the few-shot
learning trajectory between 4 and 256 examples.
2All code, interactive ﬁgures, and statistical test results are
available at https://github.com/awebson/prompt_semantics
4 8 16 32 64 128 256 2490
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9 prompt-based fine-tuning
traditional fine-tuning
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 1: How to read these ﬁgures: Each dot is the per-
formance of one prompt under one random seed (which
controls the sets of few-shot examples) of our baseline
model (ALBERT) on RTE validation set. Boxes span
from the ﬁrst quartile to the third quartile, while lines
inside boxes mark the medians. Later ﬁgures omit the
points except outliers in order to improve legibility. See
the interactive ﬁgures in our GitHub repository or Ap-
pendix H for the results of individual prompts.
Instruction-Tuned Model We additionally ex-
periment with T0, a recently proposed instruction-
tuned model which is trained on over 60 datasets
formatted with hundreds of manually written
prompts (Sanh et al., 2021). We experiment with
both sizes of T0 (3B and 11B), as well as their non-
instruction-tuned version, T5 LM-Adapted (Lester
et al., 2021), as a baseline.
V ery Large Model Lastly, we experiment with
the largest GPT-3 (175B) via priming (a.k.a. in-
context learning). Although ﬁne-tuning is techni-
cally available, it is extremely limited by OpenAI’s
various quotas. See Appendix B for details on how
we circumvent challenges in reproducing Brown
et al. (2020)’s results.
Data NLI is a task where a model is asked to
classify whether one piece of text (the “premise”)
entails another (the “hypothesis”). We focus on NLI
because all T0 variants holds out all NLI prompts
and all NLI datasets in its training, which makes it
a fair comparison to other models in this paper.
We use Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE,
Dagan et al., 2006, inter alios), a series of expert-
annotated NLI datasets. Speciﬁcally, we use the
SuperGLUE collection of RTE (i.e., RTE1, 2, 3,
and 5; all converted to binary classiﬁcation) and
report their validation accuracy for comparability
with prior work on prompts.
We also experiment with Adversarial NLI
(ANLI, Nie et al., 2020), Heuristic Analysis for
3\n\nNLI Systems (HANS, McCoy et al., 2019), and
Winograd Schema Challenge (WSC, Levesque
et al., 2012), reported in Appendices G.2, K, and
L, respectively. We ﬁnd no qualitative difference
between their and the main RTE results except that
ANLI requires much larger number of shots be-
fore obtaining any above-random accuracy, as it is
designed to be a highly challenging set.
Random Seeds & Example Sampling All ex-
periments are run over the same set of 4 random
seeds. Within a given seed, all models see the same
set of examples. For instance, under seed 1, the
4-shot models see examples 550–553, the 8-shot
models see examples 550–557, and so on. Across
different seeds, a different starting example index
is drawn. The exact training example indices are
also recorded in our GitHub repository for repro-
ducibility.
Statistical Tests We use both ANOV A and its
nonparametric equivalent, the Kruskal–Wallis test.
After ﬁnding a signiﬁcant difference among multi-
ple categories of templates, we report pairwise sig-
niﬁcance with the independent two-samplet-test
and the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. We setα = 0.05
and apply the Bonferroni correction to account for
multiple comparisons. For all results reported in
this paper, botht-test and Wilcoxon agree.
4 Effect of Templates
Our research question is whether models under-
stand prompts as meaningful task instructions anal-
ogous to how humans would. For intuition, sup-
pose an experimenter provides a human annotator
with an informative instruction of a reasonably easy
task. If the annotator understands the instruction,
we expect them to perform better than when the
experimenter provides intentionally misleading in-
structions, makes irrelevant chitchat, or says noth-
ing at all. Accordingly, we write various prompt
templates that correspond to these different scenar-
ios and evaluate models’ performance with these
templates in zero-shot and few-shot settings.
4.1 Method
We write 5 categories of templates (Table 1), with
at least 5 templates for each category (10 for in-
structive):
• Instructive: how we would describe the NLI
task to a human who has never seen this task
before.
Category Examples
instructive {prem} Are we justiﬁed in saying that “{hypo}”?
Suppose {prem} Can we infer that “{hypo}”?
misleading-
moderate
{prem} Can that be paraphrased as: “{hypo}”?
{prem} Are there lots of similar words in “{hypo}”?
misleading-
extreme
{prem} is the sentiment positive? {hypo}
{prem} is this a sports news? {hypo}
irrelevant {prem} If bonito ﬂakes boil more than a few seconds
the stock becomes too strong. "{hypo}"?
null {premise} {hypothesis}
{hypothesis} {premise}
Table 1: Example templates for NLI.
• Misleading-Moderate: instruct the models to
perform a task related or tangential to NLI
such that, if the model were to perform the
task as explicitly instructed, it would perform
poorly on NLI in general.3
• Misleading-Extreme: instruct the models to
perform a task unrelated to NLI.
• Irrelevant: concatenate the premise, a sentence
unrelated to any NLP task, and the hypothesis.
• Null: concatenate the premise and the hypoth-
esis without any additional text.
See Table 1 for examples and Appendix F
for the full list. We use “prompt” to mean a
unique combination of a template and a pre-
deﬁned LM target word for each class label.
For example, {“yes” → entailment, “no” →
non-entailment} are the default targets for the
template {premise} Should we assume
that {hypothesis}? [prediction] . In
this section, to control for the effect of target words,
a template’s performance is always reported with
“yes”/“no” as its target words, which consistently
perform best. In Section 5, we control for the tem-
plates and study the effect of different target words.
We further control for punctuation, declarative vs.
interrogative templates, and the order of concate-
nation (always {premise} some template
text {hypothesis}[prediction]).
After preliminary experiments, to avoid cherry
picking, all prompts reported in this paper were
written prior to evaluation, i.e., we do not allow
3An author manually labeled the 30 training examples
seen by models under random seed 1 (example nos. 550–580),
among which we ﬁnd 17 pairs of entailment, 5 or 8 pairs
(depending on how strictly one judges their acceptability) of
summarizations, and only one pair of paraphrase.
4\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
instructive
irrelevant
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 2: T0 (3B) on RTE. There is no practical dif-
ference between the performance of the models trained
with instructive templates vs. those trained with irrele-
vant templates at any number of shots.
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
instructive
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 3: T0 (3B) on RTE. There is no practical dif-
ference between models trained with instructive and
misleading-moderate templates at any number of shots.
But models trained with misleading-far templates are
statistically signiﬁcantly worse from 8 to 128 shots.
retroactively editing prompts for performance ma-
nipulations, except for an ablation study that explic-
itly studies the effect of punctuation (Appendix A).
4.2 Result
Irrelevant Templates We ﬁnd that models
trained with irrelevant templates learn just as fast
as those trained with instructive templates, with no
practical difference4 at any number of shots (Fig-
ure 2). This is true for all models and all datasets
we experimented, including the largest GPT-3 (Fig-
4We acknowledge that a lack of a statistically signiﬁcant
difference does not entail “no difference”. While it is true that
we ﬁnd no statistically signiﬁcant difference with the inde-
pendent two-sample t-test and the Wilcoxon rank-sum test
whenever we say “no practical difference”, note that our argu-
ment, here and throught the paper, hinges on the very small
effect sizes, not the signiﬁcance tests, i.e., the two categories
of prompts perform too similarly in absolute terms.
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85 aggregated instructive templates
{premise} [mask] {hypothesis}
[mask] {hypothesis} {premise}
[mask] {premise} {hypothesis}
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 4: ALBERT on RTE. After 32 shots, models
trained with 2 null templates learn just as fast as the in-
structive templates, but models trained with other null
templates (e.g., purple) are much worse.
ure 6).
Misleading Templates There is no consistent re-
lation between the performance of models trained
with templates that are moderately misleading (e.g.
{premise} Can that be paraphrased
as "{hypothesis}"? ) vs. templates that are
extremely misleading (e.g., {premise} Is
this a sports news? {hypothesis} ).
T0 (both 3B and 11B) perform better given
misleading-moderate (Figure 3), ALBERT and
T5 3B perform better given misleading-extreme
(Appendices E and G.4), whereas T5 11B and
GPT-3 perform comparably on both sets (Figure 6;
also see Table 2 for a summary of statistical
signiﬁcances.) Despite a lack of pattern between
the two misleading categories, however, it is
consistent that each model exhibits signiﬁcantly
better performance on instructive templates
compared to at least one category of misleading
templates.
Null Templates Models trained with null tem-
plates perform far worse than all other categories
of templates (see Appendix G for all null re-
sults). Here, we focus on ALBERT (an encoder-
only masked language model), which allows more
permutation of concatenation orders by placing
mask in the middle of sentences. We see that, al-
though null templates are much worse in aggregate,
some subset of them (e.g., {premise} [mask]
{hypothesis}) are still able to learn nearly as
fast as the average instructive template after 32
shots (Figure 4).
Zero-Shot So far, we have focused on few-shot
results. At zero shots, all models (including GPT-3
5\n\n7% 7% 7%








LQVWUXFWLYH
LUUHOHYDQW
PLVOHDGLQJPRGHUDWH
PLVOHDGLQJH[WUHPH
QXOO
given… is it 
guaranteed true that
does the paragraph 
start with “the”
is this 
grammatically 
correct
are there lots of 
similar words
is the 
sentiment 
positiveinflections are 
annoying
are we justified 
in saying that
Figure 5: Zero-shot accuracy of instruction-tuned models on RTE. Each prompt’s performance is a single point
(unlike the few-shot ﬁgures where each prompt is approximated by multiple points with multiple samplings of
few-shot examples.) Arrows highlight some prompts with their excerpts. See Appendix I for the full results.
GPT-3 (175B) T5 LMA (11B) T0 (11B) T0++ (11B)
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
instructive irrelevant mis-moderatemis-extremenull
Figure 6: 16-shot accuracy of four large models on
RTE. For GPT-3, there is no practical difference be-
tween any template categories except null (not plotted
because they are below 0.5). For T5, there is no prac-
tical difference between instructive and irrelevant. For
T0, there is no practical difference between instructive
and irrelevant nor between instructive and misleading-
moderate. For T0++, there is no practical difference be-
tween instructive and irrelevant nor between instructive
and misleading-extreme.
175B) perform only marginally above random, ex-
cept the instruction-tuned T0. Thus, for our analysis
of zero shot performance, we focus on T0. Figure 5
shows that there is no practical difference between
the performance of T0 3B given instructive tem-
plates and either category of misleading templates.
T0 11B performs better, although it also shows no
practical difference between misleading-moderate
and instructive templates. Lastly, T0++ (trained on
more datasets than other T0 variants), is the only
model in this paper that shows statistically signiﬁ-
cantly different performance across all categories
of prompts. However, there remains the caveat that
it still performs arguably too well in absolute terms
with pathological prompts, which we discuss in the
next section.
4.3 Discussion
Recall that a common assumption in the literature
is that prompts require experts to clearly and cor-
rectly describe the task at hand (§1). In contrast,
Table 2 summarizes that, with the exception of
T0++ at zero shots, all models perform essentially
as well with some pathological prompts as they do
with proper prompts. Notably, despite being much
larger than its competitors, GPT-3 shows the same
patterns of behaviors, suggesting that mere scaling
does not address this issue. Meanwhile, the evi-
dence from instruction tuning is mixed. Although
Sanh et al. (2021) are right that instruction tuning
yields substantial improvement in performance as
well as robustness as measured by variance, T0 is
somewhat too robust and less sensitive to the se-
mantics of the prompts in terms of distinguishing
proper instructions from pathological ones, com-
pared to T5 of the same size in the few-shot setting
(Figure 6).
In the zero-shot setting, we do see that that
the largest model instruction-tuned with the most
datasets (T0++) improves a model’s sensitivity
to prompt semantics. This is a positive result,
but it comes with the caveat that there still exist
6\n\nsize #shots inst. > mis-moderate inst. > mis-extreme inst. > irrelevant inst. > null
T0 3B 0 
T0 11B 0   
T0++ 11B 0    
ALBERT 235M 4 - 256  
T5 LMA 770M 4 - 256
T5 LMA 3B 4 - 256  
T0 3B 4 - 256  
T5 LMA 11B 16   
T0 11B 16  
T0++ 11B 16  
GPT-3 175B 16 
Table 2: Checkmarks indicate where two categories of templates lead to statistically signiﬁcantly different perfor-
mance, as measured by an independent two-sample t-test and a Wilcoxon rank-sum test; both tests always agree
in this table. A lack of checkmark indicates where model performance fails to differentiate the two categories,
i.e., models do not understand the differences between the prompt categories. We consider signiﬁcant differences
(checkmarks) between categories of prompts to be necessary—but not sufﬁcient—for language understanding.
numerous examples of pathological prompts that
perform just as well as the proper ones do. To be
charitable to randomness in neural models, we hold
this study to a higher standard by comparing means
and medians among categories with statistical tests.
Nevertheless, for our research question, existence
proofs alone are still alarming. For example,
without any gradient update nor priming, it is
striking that out-of-the-box T0++ scores a high
accuracy of 78% with the extremely misleading
{premise} Is that grammatically
correct? {hypothesis} , the same accu-
racy as it achieves with a proper instruction
{premise} Are we justified in
saying "{hypothesis}"? If models were
truly classifying whether the text is grammatical, it
would have only scored 52.7% because RTE is writ-
ten by experts and all examples are grammatical.
Even templates that underperform the instructive
ones seem to be too good. For example, it is
difﬁcult to imagine a human scoring 72%zero-shot
with the prompt {premise} Inflections
are annoying and thank god that
Middle English got rid of most of
them. {hypothesis} for a nuanced task like
NLI.
5 Effect of Target Words
5.1 Method
In this experiment, we study the effect of different
LM target words given a ﬁxed template. We write
4 categories of targets, with at least 3 pairs of target
words for each category (except the singleton yes-
no category):
1. Yes-no: Model is expected to predict the
word “yes” for entailment and “no” for non-
entailment.
2. Yes-no-like: Semantically equivalent to yes-
no but using superﬁcially different words, e.g.,
“true”/“false”, “positive”/“negative”.
3. Arbitrary: Model is expected to predict arbi-
trary words that have no semantic relation to
the entailment task, e.g., “cat” for entailment,
“dog” for non-entailment.
4. Reversed: Model is expected to predict the
opposite of the (intuitive) yes-no and yes-no-
like labels, e.g., “no” for entailment, “yes” for
non-entailment.
See Appendix F.3 for the full list. Within the arbi-
trary category, in addition to the common anglo-
phone ﬁrst names as Le Scao and Rush (2021) use,
we also include word pairs with high semantic sim-
ilarity, low similarity, and pairs which are highly
frequent in the English language, but we ﬁnd no
consistent difference among these various subcate-
gories of the arbitrary category.
5.2 Result
For both ALBERT and T0, we ﬁnd that models
trained with yes-no targets learn a good deal faster
than those trained with yes-no-like targets and dra-
matically faster than those with arbitrary and re-
versed targets. For example, Figure 7 shows the
7\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
yes;no
agree;disagree
no;yes
cat;dog
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 7: The best-performing instructive template for
ALBERT on RTE, {prem} Are we justified
in saying that "{hypo}"? with select LM
targets from each category.
yes-no yes-no-like arbitrary reversed
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
Template Category
instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
LM Target Category
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 8: T0 (3B)’s 32-shot accuracy with of all
template-target combinations on RTE. In general, the
choice of target words (x-axis groups) matters much
more than the choice of templates (colors).
top-performing instructive template trained with
different target words. At 32 shots, the difference
between the median accuracies of “yes”/“no” vs.
“no”/“yes” is 22.2%, far larger than the effect size
of varying categories of templates in Section 4. Ag-
gregating over all combination of templates and
targets, Figure 8 conﬁrms that the choice of target
words matter much more than the meaning of the
templates.
5.3 Discussion
The fact that models consistently learn slower with
arbitrary and reversed target words is a positive
result: this type of performance differential is con-
sistent with what we expect for models that are
correctly sensitive to the semantics of the words.
However, there are several important negative re-
sults in these experiments as well. First, the effect
of the target words overrides the semantics of the
4 8 16 32 64 128 2560.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
yes;no
good;bad
no;yes
cat;dog
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 9: The best-performing instructive template
for T0 (3B) on RTE, {prem} Based on the
previous passage, is it true that
"{hypo}"? with select LM targets from each
category.
overall prompt. Consider two kinds of template-
target combinations:
1. An irrelevant or misleading template + yes-no
targets, e.g., {premise} Does the
paragraph start with "the"?
[yes/no] {hypothesis}
2. An instructive template + arbitrary tar-
gets, e.g., {premise} Based on the
previous passage, is it true
that "{hypothesis}"? [cat/dog]
Figure 10 shows that combinations such as (1) often
dramatically outperform (2). However, (2) simply
requires ﬁguring out a mapping: “Reply ‘cat’ if en-
tailed and reply ‘dog’ if not entailed”. For humans,
this can be learned in a few shots, e.g., Ferrigno
et al. (2017) showed that adults can reach 60% ac-
curacy in 18 trials5 for an arbitrary map of {more
numerous → star shape, less numerous → diamond
shape} without receiving any language instructions.
In contrast, models under many arbitrary LM tar-
gets struggle to reach 60% median accuracy even
by 64 shots with instructive templates (Figure 10
green; Figure 7 red, purple).
Further, even given intuitive yes-no-like targets
such as “agree”/“disagree” and “good”/“bad”, mod-
els learn much slower compared to when given
“yes”/“no”. As Figure 7 (green vs. dark green) and
Figure 8 (ﬁrst vs. second x-axis group) show, there
exists a large performance gap between yes-no and
5And this comparison is heavily charitable to the models
because “18 trials” means that humans see 18 examples for 18
times in total, whereas “20-shot” means that models can see
the same 20 examples over and over again for many epochs.
8\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
{prem} Based on the previous passage, is it true that
"{hypo}"? {“cat” → entailment, “dog” → non-entailment}
{prem} Does the paragraph start with "the"? {hypo}
{“yes” → entailment, “no” → non-entailment}
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 10: T0 (3B) on RTE. Misleading templates +
yes-no targets (red) learn substantially faster than in-
structive templates + arbitrary targets (green), which is
the opposite of what we expect from humans.
yes-no-like targets which is not closed until 256
shots. Moreover, when we try to help the models
by appending target hints such as “True or false?”
to the templates, performance often drops instead,
echoing Sanh et al. (2021) and Wei et al. (2021)’s
ﬁndings that including answer choices in input se-
quence make models perform worse for certain
tasks.
6 General Discussion
6.1 Summary and Interpretation
Our main research question is whether models un-
derstand prompts as meaningful task instructions
analogous to how humans would. Again, suppose
an experimenter provides a human annotator with
an informative instruction of a reasonably easy task.
If the annotator understands the instruction, we
expect them to perform better than when the ex-
perimenter provides misleading instructions, irrele-
vant instructions, or no instructions at all. Section 4
shows that the performance of most models is insen-
sitive to the difference between instructive and irrel-
evant templates, moderately sensitive between in-
structive and misleading templates, and highly sen-
sitive between instructive and null templates. Com-
paring to the effect of the templates, however, Sec-
tion 5 shows that models are much more sensitive
to the semantics of the target words: they learn far
slower with arbitrary or reversed target words as de-
sired. However, they are overly sensitive to seman-
tically equivalent yes-no-like words (i.e., perform-
ing much worse with “agree”/“disagree” than with
“yes”/“no”), and the choice of target words over-
ride the semantics of the templates (e.g., perform-
ing much better given a irrelevant template with
“yes”/“no” targets than with an instructive template
with arbitrary targets such as “cat”/“dog”).
Our main argument throughout the paper shares
the same logic as a recent line of studies (Sinha
et al., 2021; O’Connor and Andreas, 2021; Pham
et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2021) which argue that
the fact that LMs achieve good performance un-
der ideal conditions is insufﬁcient to establish lan-
guage understanding because they also succeed
under pathological conditions (e.g., sentences with
shufﬂed word order) where humans fail catastroph-
ically.6 In other words, the fact that models are so
good at inferring the gold labels from pathologi-
cal inputs casts major doubts on whether models
make inferences in any way that resembles how
humans make inferences. For our results, the fact
that models are so good at learning from patho-
logical instructions likewise casts major doubts on
whether models understand prompts as instructions
in any way that resembles how humans understand
instructions.
6.2 Alternative Interpretations and Future
Directions
As with any extrinsic evaluation, accuracy cannot
directly measure understanding. For example, a hu-
man could perfectly understand an instruction but
still, e.g., have the same accuracy with instructive
vs. irrelevant templates because the task itself is
too hard (a lack of competence) or because they for
some reason ignore the instructions (a lack of com-
pliance). We discuss these two possibilities below.
Lack of Competence This is primarily a con-
cern for non-instruction-tuned models at zero shots,
where all models perform only slightly above ran-
dom, and thus a lack of statistical signiﬁcance
among template categories is ambiguous as to
whether models lack understanding of NLI instruc-
tions vs. if models lack the competence in NLI per
se. This is why our study largely focuses on the few-
6See Ravishankar et al. (2022), Papadimitriou et al. (2022),
and Kulmizev and Nivre (2021) for a nuanced ongoing debate
on the extent models know vs. use syntactic coding properties
on what kinds of examples. But even considering these new
evidences, we think Sinha et al. (2021) are at least correct
that, as they ﬁnd that human experts perform far worse on
shufﬂed NLI inferences than RoBERTa does, models must
be processing linguistic inferences quite differently from how
humans do, regardless of whether models know word order
information.
9\n\nshot setting, where a lack of competence is less of
a concern, as models do competently achieve good
accuracies that are only moderately below the state-
of-the-art non-few-shot models.
Another counterargument is that maybe no mod-
els ever actually reason about if a premise entails a
hypothesis. Maybe they just always exploit spuri-
ous or heuristic features and, if only they were com-
petent in properly reasoning about entailment rela-
tions, then the meaning of NLI instructions would
matter. This argument is possible, although, ﬁrst, it
hinges on to what extent NLI (or any other behav-
ioral evaluation) can measure language understand-
ing, which is a complex debate beyond the scope
of this paper. Second, in preliminary experiments
(Appendix K), our models actually zero-shot trans-
fer reasonably well to HANS (McCoy et al., 2019),
a dataset designed to diagnoses models use of NLI
heuristics. Thus, it is unlikely that models are en-
tirely incompetent in reasoning about entailment
relations and solely rely on heuristics. Regardless,
further differentiating competence in understand-
ing task instructions vs. competence in tasks per se
is an important direction for future work.
Lack of Compliance Another interpretation is
that irrelevant prompts perform the same as the in-
structive ones because models simply ignore the
prompts altogether. However, a lack of compliance
alone cannot explain our results. If models truly ig-
nore the prompts, we should not see any systematic
differences between any categories of prompts. In-
stead, we do see consistent patterns that instructive
and irrelevant templates make models learn signiﬁ-
cantly faster than misleading and null templates do
(Table 2).
A more nuanced counterargument is that al-
though models do not ignore their prompts entirely,
perhaps it “takes less effort” for models to use the
spurious or heuristic features for predictions as
opposed to the more complex syntactic or seman-
tic features (Lovering et al., 2021; Warstadt et al.,
2020) required to properly comply with the instruc-
tions. However, spurious features alone likewise
cannot explain the observed performance gaps. Re-
call that, within each random seed, all models see
exactly the same training examples (with the same
spurious features). Thus, to the extent that models
perform differently with some prompts compared
to others, it may be due to some complex interac-
tions between the (spurious or semantic) features
in prompts and the spurious features in data ex-
amples. One possible example of this interaction
is that punctuation has a large effect for irrelevant
templates, but instructive templates seem to be able
to suppress such effect (Appendix A). Investigating
the nature of this interaction is a promising direc-
tion for future work, and it suggests a way in which
the semantics of the prompt might matter, e.g., by
affecting the models’ inductive biases, even if mod-
els do not interpret or use the instructions in the
same way as humans would.
7 Conclusion
In this study, we train several prompt-based models
with over 30 manually written templates and 13 sets
of LM targets for NLI. We ﬁnd that models often
learn equally fast with misleading and irrelevant
templates as they do with instructive ones, and that
the choice of the target words overrides the mean-
ing of the overall prompts. This is true for all mod-
els and datasets with which we experimented in
the few-shot setting. Despite the mixed evidence in
the zero-shot setting with instruction-tuned models,
overall, these results contradict a hypothesis com-
monly assumed in the literature that prompts serve
as semantically meaningful task instructions and
that writing high-performing prompts requires do-
main expertise. Although we ﬁnd that existing mod-
els are far from fully understanding the meaning of
their prompts, we agree that learning from instruc-
tions is an important research direction, and we
propose several future directions of investigating
models’ understanding of the meaning of prompts.
Ethical Considerations
The fact that even the largest LMs appear to fol-
low yet do not actually follow users’ instructions
has important implications, especially considering
the increasing commercial use of LMs. While tra-
ditional ﬁne-tuned models also pose challenges
in interpretability, with prompt-based models, an
illusion of instruction following can be more per-
nicious than having no instructions at all. The in-
tuitive interface that prompts provide might make
them more accessible to lay users, and can mis-
lead users to think that their instructions are being
understood and followed. Our results suggest that
cautions are needed even more than they were with
traditional ﬁne-tuned models.
10\n\nAcknowledgments
We are grateful to Colin Raffel, Victor Sanh, Sasha
Rush, Stephen Bach, Roman Feiman, Teven Le
Scao, Ian Tenney, Dan Garrette, Jason Wei, Satoshi
Sekine, Mike Tien-Chien Chiang, Xavier Fontaine,
Pierre Colombo, Ryan Teehan, Debajyoti Datta,
William Rudman, Ruochen Zhang, Daniel Cohen,
George Zerveas, Eric Rosen, Kaiyu Zheng, Nihal
Nayak, Roma Patel, Charles Lovering, Tian Yun,
Jack Merullo, and Aaron Traylor for comments and
discussions on early drafts of this paper. Special
thanks to Victor, Colin, and Teven for technical
clariﬁcations and code review.
Furthermore, Albert is indebted to Colin and
Sasha for their patience on the many iterations of
the zero-shot Figure 5 as well as invaluable men-
torship throughout the T0 project.
References
Jonathan Bragg, Arman Cohan, Kyle Lo, and Iz Belt-
agy. 2021. FLEX: Unifying evaluation for few-shot
NLP. ArXiv preprint, abs/2107.07170.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu,
Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen,
Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam Mc-
Candlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario
Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learn-
ers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, De-
cember 6-12, 2020, virtual .
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Machine Learning Challenges Work-
shop, pages 177–190. Springer.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, V olume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Stephen Ferrigno, Julian Jara-Ettinger, Steven T Pianta-
dosi, and Jessica F Cantlon. 2017. Universal and
uniquely human factors in spontaneous number per-
ception. Nature communications, 8(1):1–10.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black,
Anthony DiPoﬁ, Charles Foster, Laurence Gold-
ing, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muen-
nighoff, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Eric Tang,
Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou.
2021a. A framework for few-shot language model
evaluation.
Tianyu Gao, Adam Fisch, and Danqi Chen. 2021b.
Making pre-trained language models better few-shot
learners. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (V olume 1: Long Papers),
pages 3816–3830, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Marvin J Greenberg. 1974. Euclidean and non-
Euclidean Geometries: Development and history. W.
H. Freeman and Company.
Ashim Gupta, Giorgi Kvernadze, and Vivek Srikumar.
2021. Bert & family eat word salad: Experiments
with text understanding.
Junxian He, Chunting Zhou, Xuezhe Ma, Taylor Berg-
Kirkpatrick, and Graham Neubig. 2021. Towards a
uniﬁed view of parameter-efﬁcient transfer learning.
CoRR, abs/2110.04366.
Daniel Khashabi, Shane Lyu, Sewon Min, Lianhui Qin,
Kyle Richardson, Sameer Singh, Sean Welleck, Han-
naneh Hajishirzi, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal,
et al. 2021. Prompt waywardness: The curious case
of discretized interpretation of continuous prompts.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08348.
Artur Kulmizev and Joakim Nivre. 2021. Schr \"
odinger’s tree–on syntax and neural language mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08887.
Andrew K Lampinen, Ishita Dasgupta, Stephanie CY
Chan, Kory Matthewson, Michael Henry Tessler,
Antonia Creswell, James L McClelland, Jane X
Wang, and Felix Hill. 2022. Can language models
learn from explanations in context? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02329.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman,
Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut.
2020. ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised
learning of language representations. In 8th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30,
2020. OpenReview.net.
Teven Le Scao and Alexander Rush. 2021. How many
data points is a prompt worth? In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-
man Language Technologies, pages 2627–2636, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. 2021.
The power of scale for parameter-efﬁcient prompt
tuning. In EMNLP.
11\n\nHector Levesque, Ernest Davis, and Leora Morgen-
stern. 2012. The winograd schema challenge. In
Thirteenth international conference on the princi-
ples of knowledge representation and reasoning .
Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. 2021. Preﬁx-tuning:
Optimizing continuous prompts for generation. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the
11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (V olume 1: Long Papers) , pages
4582–4597, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. ArXiv preprint, abs/1907.11692.
Robert L Logan IV , Ivana Balaževi ´c, Eric Wallace,
Fabio Petroni, Sameer Singh, and Sebastian Riedel.
2021. Cutting down on prompts and parameters:
Simple few-shot learning with language models.
ArXiv preprint, abs/2106.13353.
Charles Lovering, Rohan Jha, Tal Linzen, and Ellie
Pavlick. 2021. Predicting inductive biases of pre-
trained models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. 2019.
Right for the wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic
heuristics in natural language inference. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 3428–
3448, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Han-
naneh Hajishirzi. 2021. Metaicl: Learning to learn
in context. CoRR, abs/2110.15943.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe,
Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2022. Rethinking the role of demonstra-
tions: What makes in-context learning work? arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.12837.
Swaroop Mishra, Daniel Khashabi, Chitta Baral, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2021. Natural instructions:
Benchmarking generalization to new tasks from
natural language instructions. ArXiv preprint ,
abs/2104.08773.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit
Bansal, Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Ad-
versarial NLI: A new benchmark for natural lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 4885–4901, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Joe O’Connor and Jacob Andreas. 2021. What con-
text features can transformer language models use?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08367.
Isabel Papadimitriou, Richard Futrell, and Kyle Ma-
howald. 2022. When classifying grammatical role,
bert doesn’t care about word order... except when it
matters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06204.
Thang Pham, Trung Bui, Long Mai, and Anh Nguyen.
2021. Out of order: How important is the sequen-
tial order of words in a sentence in natural language
understanding tasks? In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 ,
pages 1145–1160, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Plato. c. 399 BC. Euthyphro. Penguin Books.
Archiki Prasad, Peter Hase, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit
Bansal. 2022. Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based in-
struction search for prompting large language mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07281.
Guanghui Qin and Jason Eisner. 2021. Learning how
to ask: Querying LMs with mixtures of soft prompts.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,
pages 5203–5212, Online. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits
of transfer learning with a uniﬁed text-to-text trans-
former. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
21(140):1–67.
Vinit Ravishankar, Mostafa Abdou, Artur Kulmizev,
and Anders Søgaard. 2022. Word order does mat-
ter (and shufﬂed language models know it). arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.10995.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and
Thomas Wolf. 2019. Distilbert, a distilled version
of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. ArXiv
preprint, abs/1910.01108.
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H.
Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine
Chafﬁn, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja,
Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu, Urmish
Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla,
Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani, Nihal Nayak,
Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian
Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen,
Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden,
Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Ab-
heesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Fevry, Ja-
son Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Stella Biderman, Leo
Gao, Tali Bers, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M.
Rush. 2021. Multitask prompted training enables
zero-shot task generalization.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. 2021a. Exploiting
cloze-questions for few-shot text classiﬁcation and
natural language inference. In Proceedings of the
12\n\n16th Conference of the European Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: Main V ol-
ume, pages 255–269, Online. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. 2021b. It’s not just
size that matters: Small language models are also
few-shot learners. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, pages 2339–2352, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. 2018. Adafactor:
Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory cost.
In International Conference on Machine Learning ,
pages 4596–4604. PMLR.
Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L. Logan IV ,
Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. 2020. AutoPrompt:
Eliciting Knowledge from Language Models with
Automatically Generated Prompts. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
4222–4235, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Koustuv Sinha, Prasanna Parthasarathi, Joelle Pineau,
and Adina Williams. 2021. UnNatural Language In-
ference. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (V olume 1: Long Papers),
pages 7329–7346, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Derek Tam, Rakesh R Menon, Mohit Bansal, Shashank
Srivastava, and Colin Raffel. 2021. Improving
and simplifying pattern exploiting training. ArXiv
preprint, abs/2103.11955.
Shizuo Tsuji and Mary Sutherland. 1980. Japanese
Cooking: A Simple Art . Kodansha International.
Prasetya Utama, Naﬁse Sadat Moosavi, Victor Sanh,
and Iryna Gurevych. 2021. Avoiding inference
heuristics in few-shot prompt-based ﬁnetuning. In
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
9063–9074, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia,
Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2019. Superglue: A
stickier benchmark for general-purpose language un-
derstanding systems. In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019,
NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, V ancouver ,
BC, Canada, pages 3261–3275.
Alex Warstadt, Yian Zhang, Xiaocheng Li, Haokun Liu,
and Samuel R. Bowman. 2020. Learning which fea-
tures matter: RoBERTa acquires a preference for lin-
guistic generalizations (eventually). In Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 217–
235, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin
Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, An-
drew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2021. Finetuned lan-
guage models are zero-shot learners. ArXiv preprint,
abs/2109.01652.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, V olume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-
ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-
icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen,
Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu,
Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame,
Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. 2020. Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language process-
ing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
13\n\nContents
1 Introduction 1
2 Related Work 2
2.1 Prompt-Based Models . . . . . . 2
2.2 Analyses of Prompts . . . . . . . 2
3 Overall Setup 3
4 Effect of Templates 4
4.1 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
4.2 Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
4.3 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
5 Effect of Target Words 7
5.1 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
5.2 Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
5.3 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
6 General Discussion 9
6.1 Summary and Interpretation . . . 9
6.2 Alternative Interpretations and Fu-
ture Directions . . . . . . . . . . 9
7 Conclusion 10
A Effect of Punctuation 15
B Details and Lessons from Experiment-
ing with GPT-3’s API 16
B.1 Choice of Model . . . . . . . . . 16
B.2 Priming vs. Fine-Tuning . . . . . 16
B.3 Other Tips for Working with GPT-3 17
C Hyperparameters 17
D Compute Used 17
E Additional Figures Discussed in the
Main Text 18
F All Prompts 19
F.1 Main Experiment Templates . . . 19
F.2 Ablation Experiment Templates . 20
F.3 All Target Words . . . . . . . . . 20
G Aggregated Results 21
G.1 ALBERT on RTE . . . . . . . . . 21
G.2 ALBERT on ANLI R1 . . . . . . 22
G.3 T5 770M on RTE . . . . . . . . . 23
G.4 T5 3B on RTE . . . . . . . . . . . 24
G.5 T0 3B on RTE . . . . . . . . . . . 25
G.6 T0 3B on ANLI R1 . . . . . . . . 26
G.7 T5 11B, T0 11B, and GPT-3 175B
(Figure 6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
H Results of Individual Templates 28
H.1 ALBERT . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
H.2 T0 (3B) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
H.3 T5 LM-Adapted (3B) . . . . . . . 36
I Zero-Shot Results (Figure 5) 40
J Comparison of LM targets, Controlling
for the Template 41
K Preliminary Results on HANS 44
L Preliminary Results on Winograd 45
14\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85 instructive
instructive sans qmarks
irrelevant
irrelevant sans qmarks
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 11: ALBERT on RTE. Note that (1) irrelevant
templates slightly outperform the instructive templates,
albeit without statistical signiﬁcance. (2) Irrelevant tem-
plates are far worse without quotation and question
marks. (3) But there is no signiﬁcant difference be-
tween instructive templates with or without qmarks.
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
instructive
instructive sans qmarks
irrelevant
irrelevant sans qmarks
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 12: T0 (3B) on RTE. Like ALBERT, irrelevant
sans qmarks are signiﬁcantly worse than irrelevant at
each and every shot, but there is no signiﬁcant differ-
ence between instructive with or without qmarks.
A Effect of Punctuation
For irrelevant templates, we ﬁnd a large effect
from the use of quotation and question marks in
templates. It is natural to write such punctuation
in instructive templates as they help humans
to parse an NLI hypothesis as an embedded
clause within an instruction sentence (e.g.,
Given {premise} Should we assume
that "{hypothesis}" is true? ). For
control, we also use quotation and question
marks (“qmarks” hereafter) in irrelevant tem-
plates where they would not have made sense
naturally, e.g., {premise} Single-family
zoning is bad for American cities.
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85 instructive
instructive sans qmarks
irrelevant
irrelevant sans qmarks
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 13: T5 LM-Adapted (3B). Unlike the other mod-
els, there is no statistical signiﬁcance between irrele-
vant with or without qmarks. However, instructive sans
qmarks statistically signiﬁcantly outperform instructive
at 32 and 64 shots.
"{hypothesis}"? As an ablation, when we
remove these qmarks from irrelevant templates,
the performance of ALBERT and T0 drops
substantially (Figures 11 and 12). In contrast,
for T5, qmarks make no difference for irrelevant
templates; yet, removing qmarks from instructive
templates—where qmarks are natural—boosted
performance instead for T5 (Figure 13), but not for
T0 nor ALBERT.
Additionally, as a coincidence, most mislead-
ing templates contain both quotation and question
marks, while most misleading-far templates con-
tain only question marks (Appendix F). But as
noted in Section 4.2, there is no consistent pat-
tern between those two misleading categories. In
other words, punctuations alone cannot explain ev-
erything. As discussed in Section 6.2, the full ex-
planation is likely a combined interactions between
the spurious features and the semantics of the tem-
plates.
Lastly, note that Schick and Schütze (2021b)
and many subsequent papers’ prompts for
NLI (e.g., "{hypothesis}" ? | [mask].
"{premise}") are basically null templates with
some variation in punctuation between the hy-
pothesis and the premise. We ﬁnd that models
learn poorly with the vanilla {hypothesis}
[mask] {premise} , but they learn as fast as
the instructive templates with Schick & Schütze’s
punctuated version. That being said, note again
that punctuation alone cannot explain the perfor-
mance gap, since models trained with [mask]
{hypothesis} {premise} (Figure 4, pink)
15\n\nperform second to best, yet swapping their
premises and hypotheses (Figure 4, purple) makes
it the worst performing among all null templates.
B Details and Lessons from
Experimenting with GPT-3’s API
B.1 Choice of Model
We use the davinci model provided by OpenAI
LP’s API, which corresponds to 7 the 175 billion
parameter model reported in Brown et al. (2020).
Concurrent to our work, OpenAI released a new
product called the “Instruct Series”, but we decided
to not experiment with the Instruct Series because
no academic paper or technical documentation of
any kind is available with the Instruct Series at the
time of writing aside from the following claim on
their website:8
The Instruct models share our base
GPT-3 models’ ability to understand and
generate natural language, but they’re
better at understanding and following
your instructions. You simply tell the
model what you want it to do, and it
will do its best to fulﬁll your instruc-
tions. This is an important step forward
in our goal of building safe models that
are aligned with human interests.
Crucially, the Instruct Series is inappropriate for
reproducible research because it is unknown what
datasets and prompts these models are trained on,
and whether any task categories are systematically
held out as done by Sanh et al. (2021) and Wei et al.
(2021). If it is trained on any prompt or dataset of
NLI, it would not be zero-shot, making it an un-
fair comparison to other models in our experiments.
Second, it is still in beta and its training, held-out,
and prompt mixtures could change. At least two
Instruct Series models were made available in se-
quence during our writing, and it is not clear if we
experiment on an older version, whether it will still
be available and reproducible in the future.
B.2 Priming vs. Fine-Tuning
As mentioned in Section 3, we use priming (a.k.a.
in-context learning) in lieu of ﬁne-tuning because,
7OpenAI never actually discloses which one of their com-
mercially named ada, babbage, curie, davinci
“engines” correspond to models of which size. However, Gao
et al. (2021a) estimate that they correspond to 350M, 1.3B,
6.7B, and 175B respectively.
8http://beta.openai.com/docs/engines/instruct-series-beta
at the time of writing, OpenAI’s ﬁne-tuning API is
limited to 10 runs per month. To train 30 prompts
at only two number of shots would take 6 months,
assuming we get hyperparameters right at ﬁrst try.
Further, each training run is limited to a maximum
of 5 epochs, which often entails an insufﬁcient
number steps for few-shot training. We were unable
to ﬁne-tune GPT to any reasonable accuracy with
our allowed 10 tries in the ﬁrst month. Finally, the
ﬁne-tuning API is limited to GPT variants up to
6.7B, not the 175B model we plan to experiment
with.
With priming, we are able to reproduce Brown
et al. (2020)’s zero-shot performance on RTE but
only with their exact prompt reported in their Fig-
ure G.31, all other (even instructive) prompts per-
form at random at zero shots, suggesting that their
reported prompt is highly cherry-picked. We are
unable to reproduce their reported few-shot result
because they report it at 32 shots, but their API only
permits a context length up to 2049 tokens, which
is insufﬁcient for RTE. We ﬁnd that 16 shots are
the highest one can reach within the token limit.9
Like the gradient updated models, we document
the exact examples we use for few-shot priming in
our GitHub repository. Unlike the gradient updated
models, which are trained on the same k exam-
ples, priming models use different sets ofk prim-
ing examples for each inference example (Brown
et al., 2020, p. 20). This means that GPT’s perfor-
mance reﬂects the fact that, overall, it has seen far
more thank examples, making it not directly com-
parable to the few shots of the gradient updated
models. This is not ideal, but our GPT few-shot
performance already underperforms what Brown
et al. (2020) report, so we choose to not further
restrict it to have the same ﬁxed priming examples
for all inference examples, which could run into
a lack of competence issue (§6.2) that make its
results unusable for our research question.
Lastly, unlike the gradient updated models, we
do not run multiple seeds with our GPT experi-
ments because, ﬁrst, they are expensive. As the
API bills by token, usingk shots of priming exam-
ple effectively multiplies the total cost by k. Sec-
ond, OpenAI imposes a monthly quota for each lab,
so running multiple seeds will take several more
months to complete.
9Depending on the length of the prompt template, 2 or 3
examples still exceed the token limit, in which case we remove
one priming example, keeping the other 15 priming examples
and the to-be-predicted example unmodiﬁed.
16\n\nB.3 Other Tips for Working with GPT-3
Using the logprobs argument in their API, we
obtain the top 99 predicted target word and their
log probabilities.10 Following Sanh et al. (2021)
and Wei et al. (2021), we evaluate by a rank classi-
ﬁcation of the target words, i.e., if the gold target
word is “yes”, we consider it as correct as long as
the probability of “yes” is higher than that of “no”,
regardless of whether “yes” is the top-1 prediction
generated by the model.
Alarmingly, we ﬁnd that these top-99 predictions
are semantically inconsistent ranked, e.g., for one
data example and its top-99 word predictions, it is
often the case that, e.g., P(yes) > P(no) but P(Yes)
< P(No). Thus, the choice of the target words’ sur-
face form makes a substantial difference in the
overall performance. (Not to mention the prob-
lem of choosing between yes/no, true/false, cor-
rect/incorrect, etc. as studied in Section 5.) OpenAI
recommends having no trailing space in the input
and let the model predict the ﬁrst token with a lead-
ing space as in “ Yes”. We ﬁnd that although strip-
ping the leading space sometimes leads to higher
performance for some prompts, overall not apply-
ing stripping or other token normalization performs
the best.
Another point researchers should pay attention
to is the use of what OpenAI calls a “separator”
inserted between priming examples. In preliminary
experiments, we initially use newline characters as
appeared in Brown et al. (2020)’s Appendix G. We
later discover that OpenAI recommends using ###
or \n###\n as separators. We use the latter and
ﬁnd consistent performance improvement over just
using newline characters, and we use it throughout
in our main experiments.
C Hyperparameters
For encoder-only models, we follow Schick and
Schütze (2021b) and Le Scao and Rush (2021)’s
recommendations and use a learning rate of 1e−5.
For T5 and T0 models, we follow Raffel et al.
(2020) and Sanh et al. (2021)’s recommendations
and use a learning rate of 1e−4. We run sev-
eral preliminary experiments with learning rates
(3e−4, 1e−4, 5e−5, 1e−5) deviating from their rec-
ommendations and they perform worse, although
10Although sometimes the API returns less than the num-
ber of logprobs the user speciﬁes, in which case we con-
tacted OpenAI’s customer support who provided us refund by
store credit. At the time of publishing, OpenAI now restricts
logprobs to a maximum of 5.
our search is not exhaustive due to the high cost
of running multiple prompts with multiple random
seeds.
Note that T5 and T0 are trained with the Adafac-
tor optimizer (Shazeer and Stern, 2018) in Mesh
TensorFlow. Our implementation is in PyTorch, and
we ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuning T5 with PyTorch’s imple-
mentation of Adafactor yields substantially worse
results than the usual choice of the AdamW opti-
mizer. We corresponded with Raffel et al. (2020),
who advised us that it might be due to the fact that
PyTorch does not have the same learning rate sched-
uler implementation as TensorFlow’s Adafactor
does. They recommended us to simply use AdamW,
which is what we did. This is somewhat unfortunate
because Adafactor is much more memory efﬁcient,
which would have drastically reduced the compute
resources required and thus enable more compre-
hensive experiments of the 11B models, which are
currently limited to 0 shots and 16 shots only.
Although most models seem to obtain the high-
est validation accuracy at very early epochs, we
train all models to 30 epochs (20 epochs for 11B
models) to be safe and select the checkpoint with
the highest validation accuracy.
All models use a batch size of 4 with 4 gradient
accumulation steps for an effective batch size of
16.
Note that because we use a rank classiﬁcation
of single-token target words, decoding sampling
methods (e.g., beam search, top-k, top-p) are un-
necessary.
We follow Raffel et al. (2020) and add EOS to-
kens for input sequences, which yields higher few-
shot performance compared to not adding EOS as
done by Sanh et al. (2021). However, we omit EOS
in the zero-shot setting, which exactly reproduces
the results reported by Sanh et al. (2021). See T0’s
GitHub repository readme11 for more information.
D Compute Used
Each ALBERT 235M model is trained on a single
Nvidia RTX3090. Their main experiments took
approximately 192 GPU hours.
Each T5 LMA 770M model is trained on a sin-
gle A6000. Their main experiments took approxi-
mately 48 GPU hours.
The 3B models are each trained by partitioning
their layers over four RTX3090s. T5 and T0’s main
11https://github.com/bigscience-workshop/t-zero/tree/
master/examples
17\n\nexperiments took approximately 2,304 GPU hours
in total.
The 11B models are each trained on eight V100s
(each with 32GB of memory). T5, T0, and T0++’s
main experiments took approximately 1,728 GPU
hours in total. (Due to their large GPU memory
requirement, we were only able to complete one
number of shots.)
E Additional Figures Discussed in the
Main Text
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85 instructive
irrelevant
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 14: ALBERT on RTE. Models trained with irrel-
evant templates actually slightly outperform the instruc-
tive templates, albeit without statistical signiﬁcance at
any number of shots.
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85 instructive
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 15: ALBERT on RTE. There is no statistical sig-
niﬁcance between misleading-extreme and instructive
at any number of shots. In contrast, models trained with
misleading-moderate templates are signiﬁcantly worse
than the instructive ones from 16 to 64 shots.
yes-no yes-no-like arbitrary reversed
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
Template Category
instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
null
LM Target Category
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 16: Median accuracies of all template-target
combinations at 32 shots. In general, the choice of tar-
get words (x-axis groups) matters much more than the
choice of templates (colors).
18\n\nF All Prompts
F .1 Main Experiment Templates
category template adapted from
instructive {premise} Using only the above description and what you know about the world,
"{hypothesis}" is deﬁnitely correct. Yes or no? Williams et al. (2018, p. 3)
instructive {premise} \nquestion: {hypothesis}Yes or no?\nanswer: Brown et al. (2020, p. 59)
instructive {premise} Are we justiﬁed in saying that "{hypothesis}"?
instructive Given {premise} Should we assume that "{hypothesis}" is true?
instructive {premise} Based on the previous passage, is it true that "{hypothesis}"?
instructive Given {premise} Is it guaranteed true that "{hypothesis}"?
instructive Suppose {premise} Can we infer that "{hypothesis}"?
instructive Given that {premise} Does it follow that "{hypothesis}"?
instructive {premise} Question: Does this imply that "{hypothesis}"?
instructive Given that {premise} Therefore, it must be true that "{hypothesis}"?
misleading-moderate {premise} Do most of the above words appear in the following passage? {hypothesis}
misleading-moderate {premise} Are there lots of similar words in "{hypothesis}"?
misleading-moderate {premise} Does that have the same meaning as "{hypothesis}"?
misleading-moderate {premise} Can that be paraphrased as: "{hypothesis}"?
misleading-moderate {premise} Can that be summarized as "{hypothesis}"?
misleading-extreme {premise} Does the paragraph start with "the"? {hypothesis}
misleading-extreme {premise} Is this grammatically correct? {hypothesis}
misleading-extreme {premise} Is the sentiment positive? {hypothesis}
misleading-extreme {premise} Is this a sports news? {hypothesis}
misleading-extreme {premise} Is this French? {hypothesis}
irrelevant {premise} Single-family zoning is bad for American cities. "{hypothesis}"?
irrelevant {premise} Inﬂections are annoying and thank god that
Middle English got rid of most of them. "{hypothesis}"?
irrelevant {premise} When Bolyai sent Gauss his discovery of non-Euclidean geometry,
Gauss replied that he arrived at the same results 30 years ago. "{hypothesis}"?Greenberg (1974, p. 141)
irrelevant {premise} If bonito ﬂakes boil more than a few seconds,
the stock becomes too strong? "{hypothesis}"? Tsuji and Sutherland (1980, p. 148)
irrelevant {premise} Is the pious loved by the gods because it is pious?
Or is it pious because it is loved by the gods? "{hypothesis}"?Plato (c. 399 BC, 10a)
null {premise} {hypothesis}
null {hypothesis}{premise}
null (MLM only) {premise} {mask} {hypothesis}
null (MLM only) {hypothesis}{mask} {premise}
null (MLM only) {mask} {premise} {hypothesis}
null (MLM only) {mask} {hypothesis}{premise}
Table 3: All prompts used in the main text of the paper. All templates use “yes”/“no” as target words for the
entailment and non-entailment classes, respectively. For ternary NLI datasets, we use “unclear” for the neutral class,
which performs best after preliminary experiments with other ternary words: “maybe”, “sometimes”, “perhaps”,
“possibly”, and “neither”. Keen readers may notice that some of the instructive templates (e.g., should we
assume) do not instruct a strict entailment task. We intentionally wrote a mixture of instructions that asks for
strictly logical entailment and pragmatic inference, intending to measure if models can distinguish between the
two on datasets such as HANS (McCoy et al., 2019) that magnify different predictions caused by pragmatic effects.
Of course, this research question became moot as we found that models cannot even distinguish among much more
pathological prompts.
19\n\nF .2 Ablation Experiment Templates
category template
instructive sans qmarks{premise} Using only the above description and what you know about the world, {hypothesis}is deﬁnitely correct. Yes or no
instructive sans qmarks {premise}\nquestion: {hypothesis}Yes or no\nanswer:
instructive sans qmarks {premise} Are we justiﬁed in saying that {hypothesis}
instructive sans qmarks Given {premise} Should we assume that {hypothesis}is true
instructive sans qmarks {premise} Based on the previous passage, is it true that {hypothesis}
instructive sans qmarks Given {premise} Is it guaranteed true that {hypothesis}
instructive sans qmarks Suppose {premise} Can we infer that {hypothesis}
instructive sans qmarks Given that {premise} Does it follow that {hypothesis}
instructive sans qmarks {premise} Question: Does this imply that {hypothesis}
instructive sans qmarks Given that {premise} Therefore, it must be true that {hypothesis}
irrelevant sans qmarks {premise} Single-family zoning is bad for American cities. {hypothesis}
irrelevant sans qmarks{premise} Inﬂections are annoying and thank god that Middle English got rid of most of them. {hypothesis}
irrelevant sans qmarks{premise} When Bolyai sent Gauss his discovery of non-Euclidean geometry,
Gauss replied that he arrived at the same results 30 years ago. {hypothesis}
irrelevant sans qmarks{premise} If bonito ﬂakes boil more than a few seconds, the stock becomes too strong. {hypothesis}
irrelevant sans qmarks{premise} Is the pious loved by the gods because it is pious. Or is it pious because it is loved by the gods. {hypothesis}
Table 4: Used in the study of the effect of question and quotation marks in Appendix A.
F .3 All Target Words
Category Target Words
yes-no yes;no
yes-no-like true;false
yes-no-like positive;negative
yes-no-like right;wrong
yes-no-like correct;incorrect
yes-no-like agree;disagree
yes-no-like good;bad
reversed no;yes
reversed false;true
reversed negative;positive
arbitrary B;C
arbitrary cat;dog
arbitrary she;he
Table 5: LM targets used in Section 5. Again, for ternary NLI datasets, we use “unclear” for the neutral class,
which performs best after preliminary experiments with other ternary words: “maybe”, “sometimes”, “perhaps”,
“possibly”, and “neither”. Within the arbitrary category, in addition to the common anglophone ﬁrst names as
Le Scao and Rush (2021) use, we also tried word pairs with high semantic similarity (“cat”/“dog”), low similar-
ity (“cake”/“piano”, “write”/“sleep”), and pairs which are highly frequent in the English language (“she”/“he”,
“the”/“a”) in preliminary experiments, but we ﬁnd no consistent difference among these various subcategories of
the arbitrary category.
20\n\nG Aggregated Results
G.1 ALBERT on RTE
4 8 16 32 64 128
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
null
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
num. shots template category median q3 - q1 mean std. dev.
4 instructive 0.5830 0.0885 0.5907 0.0517
4 irrelevant 0.6300 0.1291 0.6170 0.0645
4 misleading-extreme 0.5884 0.0469 0.5787 0.0342
4 misleading-moderate 0.5650 0.0722 0.5753 0.0418
4 null 0.5560 0.0433 0.5599 0.0324
8 instructive 0.6155 0.0920 0.6186 0.0524
8 irrelevant 0.6570 0.0307 0.6471 0.0374
8 misleading-extreme 0.6101 0.0677 0.5899 0.0595
8 misleading-moderate 0.6047 0.0767 0.5969 0.0490
8 null 0.5632 0.0397 0.5586 0.0326
16 instructive 0.6697 0.0605 0.6594 0.0558
16 irrelevant 0.6787 0.0488 0.6787 0.0294
16 misleading-extreme 0.6390 0.0506 0.6413 0.0384
16 misleading-moderate 0.6083 0.0443 0.6072 0.0427
16 null 0.5722 0.0379 0.5767 0.0327
32 instructive 0.7022 0.0813 0.6929 0.0638
32 irrelevant 0.7292 0.0235 0.7206 0.0236
32 misleading-extreme 0.7076 0.0334 0.7056 0.0340
32 misleading-moderate 0.6516 0.0992 0.6350 0.0666
32 null 0.6318 0.0731 0.6414 0.0392
64 instructive 0.7545 0.0542 0.7353 0.0548
64 irrelevant 0.7491 0.0198 0.7455 0.0218
64 misleading-extreme 0.7509 0.0416 0.7451 0.0299
64 misleading-moderate 0.7310 0.0993 0.6953 0.0688
64 null 0.7004 0.0848 0.6998 0.0516
128 instructive 0.7834 0.0451 0.7661 0.0551
128 irrelevant 0.7671 0.0343 0.7704 0.0200
128 misleading-extreme 0.7798 0.0334 0.7729 0.0255
128 misleading-moderate 0.7744 0.0550 0.7354 0.0842
128 null 0.7329 0.0695 0.7369 0.0389
21\n\nG.2 ALBERT on ANLI R1
32 64 128 256 512 1024
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65 instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
null
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
num. shots template category median q3 - q1 mean std. dev.
32 instructive 0.3640 0.0232 0.3625 0.0166
32 irrelevant 0.3660 0.0140 0.3681 0.0134
32 misleading-extreme 0.3380 0.0100 0.3404 0.0081
32 misleading-moderate 0.3455 0.0130 0.3470 0.0098
32 null 0.3540 0.0177 0.3567 0.0122
64 instructive 0.3735 0.0408 0.3738 0.0251
64 irrelevant 0.3760 0.0210 0.3788 0.0178
64 misleading-extreme 0.3485 0.0135 0.3510 0.0129
64 misleading-moderate 0.3525 0.0197 0.3574 0.0171
64 null 0.3660 0.0208 0.3675 0.0184
128 instructive 0.4050 0.0562 0.3992 0.0356
128 irrelevant 0.4105 0.0240 0.4120 0.0176
128 misleading-extreme 0.3840 0.0262 0.3843 0.0204
128 misleading-moderate 0.3720 0.0295 0.3725 0.0199
128 null 0.3800 0.0235 0.3857 0.0247
256 instructive 0.4625 0.0490 0.4504 0.0450
256 irrelevant 0.4695 0.0175 0.4694 0.0147
256 misleading-extreme 0.4350 0.0297 0.4263 0.0231
256 misleading-moderate 0.4375 0.0492 0.4265 0.0353
256 null 0.4155 0.0475 0.4167 0.0365
512 instructive 0.5085 0.0235 0.4992 0.0434
512 irrelevant 0.5185 0.0230 0.5154 0.0186
512 misleading-extreme 0.5050 0.0172 0.5008 0.0177
512 misleading-moderate 0.4930 0.0285 0.4839 0.0413
512 null 0.4480 0.0550 0.4564 0.0399
1024 instructive 0.5555 0.0270 0.5557 0.0449
1024 irrelevant 0.5560 0.0345 0.5729 0.0351
1024 misleading-extreme 0.5330 0.0265 0.5477 0.0316
1024 misleading-moderate 0.5405 0.0247 0.5447 0.0388
1024 null 0.4990 0.0588 0.5062 0.0392
22\n\nG.3 T5 770M on RTE
4 8 16 32 64 128
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75 instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
null
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
num. shots template category median q3 - q1 mean std. dev.
4 instructive 0.5433 0.0406 0.5493 0.0219
4 irrelevant 0.5469 0.0424 0.5532 0.0252
4 misleading-extreme 0.5560 0.0361 0.5561 0.0263
4 misleading-moderate 0.5542 0.0325 0.5531 0.0220
4 null 0.5451 0.0487 0.5451 0.0578
8 instructive 0.5487 0.0235 0.5516 0.0232
8 irrelevant 0.5415 0.0280 0.5480 0.0244
8 misleading-extreme 0.5632 0.0379 0.5545 0.0322
8 misleading-moderate 0.5487 0.0280 0.5543 0.0192
8 null 0.5217 0.0560 0.5122 0.0317
16 instructive 0.5668 0.0406 0.5662 0.0277
16 irrelevant 0.5578 0.0298 0.5558 0.0199
16 misleading-extreme 0.5632 0.0190 0.5634 0.0160
16 misleading-moderate 0.5632 0.0343 0.5666 0.0239
16 null 0.5542 0.0271 0.5469 0.0381
32 instructive 0.6047 0.0433 0.6078 0.0317
32 irrelevant 0.6029 0.0361 0.6025 0.0366
32 misleading-extreme 0.5939 0.0352 0.5996 0.0292
32 misleading-moderate 0.5884 0.0424 0.5986 0.0311
32 null 0.5722 0.0460 0.5772 0.0443
64 instructive 0.6264 0.0433 0.6318 0.0324
64 irrelevant 0.6697 0.0542 0.6585 0.0421
64 misleading-extreme 0.6318 0.0478 0.6336 0.0355
64 misleading-moderate 0.6227 0.0578 0.6195 0.0400
64 null 0.6173 0.0496 0.6115 0.0442
128 instructive 0.6859 0.0514 0.6820 0.0421
128 irrelevant 0.6805 0.0307 0.6749 0.0362
128 misleading-extreme 0.7022 0.0361 0.6987 0.0260
128 misleading-moderate 0.6516 0.0379 0.6597 0.0295
128 null 0.6191 0.1291 0.6277 0.0717
23\n\nG.4 T5 3B on RTE
4 8 16 32 64 128
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85 instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
null
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
num. shots template category median q3 - q1 mean std. dev.
4 instructive 0.5433 0.0442 0.5524 0.0297
4 irrelevant 0.5560 0.0469 0.5611 0.0308
4 misleading-extreme 0.5668 0.0442 0.5671 0.0251
4 misleading-moderate 0.5379 0.0415 0.5497 0.0247
4 null 0.5523 0.0514 0.5575 0.0334
8 instructive 0.5650 0.0514 0.5680 0.0427
8 irrelevant 0.5704 0.0343 0.5676 0.0332
8 misleading-extreme 0.5848 0.0397 0.5773 0.0431
8 misleading-moderate 0.5523 0.0442 0.5485 0.0309
8 null 0.5542 0.0523 0.5553 0.0459
16 instructive 0.5866 0.0505 0.6005 0.0467
16 irrelevant 0.5921 0.0406 0.5907 0.0279
16 misleading-extreme 0.5921 0.0262 0.5953 0.0271
16 misleading-moderate 0.5704 0.0298 0.5693 0.0212
16 null 0.5848 0.0614 0.5833 0.0481
32 instructive 0.6227 0.1056 0.6463 0.0757
32 irrelevant 0.6336 0.0623 0.6349 0.0416
32 misleading-extreme 0.6191 0.0542 0.6315 0.0393
32 misleading-moderate 0.6011 0.0298 0.6134 0.0440
32 null 0.5939 0.0848 0.6031 0.0548
64 instructive 0.7220 0.1227 0.7113 0.0784
64 irrelevant 0.7040 0.0578 0.7032 0.0408
64 misleading-extreme 0.7076 0.0478 0.7039 0.0352
64 misleading-moderate 0.6697 0.0957 0.6792 0.0569
64 null 0.6390 0.0984 0.6397 0.0618
128 instructive 0.7996 0.0496 0.7769 0.0627
128 irrelevant 0.7473 0.0415 0.7468 0.0271
128 misleading-extreme 0.7653 0.0262 0.7604 0.0295
128 misleading-moderate 0.7690 0.0632 0.7685 0.0373
128 null 0.6661 0.1318 0.6640 0.0716
24\n\nG.5 T0 3B on RTE
4 8 16 32 64 128
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
null
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
num. shots template category median q3 - q1 mean std. dev.
4 instructive 0.6805 0.0704 0.6677 0.0580
4 irrelevant 0.6534 0.0596 0.6695 0.0450
4 misleading-extreme 0.6336 0.0379 0.6368 0.0469
4 misleading-moderate 0.6805 0.0966 0.6644 0.0525
4 null 0.6282 0.0442 0.6223 0.0292
8 instructive 0.6859 0.0361 0.6850 0.0438
8 irrelevant 0.6769 0.0487 0.6579 0.0674
8 misleading-extreme 0.6444 0.0749 0.6401 0.0543
8 misleading-moderate 0.6968 0.0478 0.6747 0.0530
8 null 0.6047 0.0514 0.6137 0.0357
16 instructive 0.7238 0.0325 0.7290 0.0284
16 irrelevant 0.7166 0.0433 0.7171 0.0315
16 misleading-extreme 0.6895 0.0415 0.6879 0.0410
16 misleading-moderate 0.7166 0.0523 0.7191 0.0337
16 null 0.6227 0.0596 0.6322 0.0423
32 instructive 0.7545 0.0542 0.7627 0.0369
32 irrelevant 0.7599 0.0695 0.7621 0.0397
32 misleading-extreme 0.7256 0.0451 0.7278 0.0361
32 misleading-moderate 0.7491 0.0406 0.7551 0.0279
32 null 0.6968 0.0632 0.6859 0.0578
64 instructive 0.8014 0.0289 0.8027 0.0190
64 irrelevant 0.7978 0.0298 0.8040 0.0204
64 misleading-extreme 0.7834 0.0271 0.7827 0.0201
64 misleading-moderate 0.7978 0.0361 0.8000 0.0225
64 null 0.7112 0.0912 0.7053 0.0600
128 instructive 0.8303 0.0253 0.8292 0.0161
128 irrelevant 0.8231 0.0153 0.8244 0.0118
128 misleading-extreme 0.8087 0.0190 0.8088 0.0174
128 misleading-moderate 0.8195 0.0135 0.8215 0.0152
128 null 0.7238 0.0966 0.7401 0.0505
25\n\nG.6 T0 3B on ANLI R1
32 64 128 256 512 1024
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65 instructive
irrelevant
misleading-moderate
misleading-extreme
null
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
num. shots template category median q3 - q1 mean std. dev.
32 instructive 0.3640 0.0185 0.3664 0.0129
32 irrelevant 0.3660 0.0190 0.3637 0.0119
32 misleading-extreme 0.3610 0.0200 0.3638 0.0117
32 misleading-moderate 0.3650 0.0175 0.3631 0.0125
32 null 0.3580 0.0115 0.3580 0.0096
64 instructive 0.3835 0.0395 0.3797 0.0255
64 irrelevant 0.3810 0.0160 0.3878 0.0141
64 misleading-extreme 0.3830 0.0340 0.3753 0.0223
64 misleading-moderate 0.3775 0.0400 0.3749 0.0259
64 null 0.3785 0.0368 0.3817 0.0275
128 instructive 0.4260 0.0233 0.4226 0.0214
128 irrelevant 0.4150 0.0170 0.4190 0.0219
128 misleading-extreme 0.3930 0.0340 0.3975 0.0227
128 misleading-moderate 0.4140 0.0318 0.4092 0.0274
128 null 0.3850 0.0247 0.3852 0.0179
256 instructive 0.4790 0.0197 0.4804 0.0181
256 irrelevant 0.4650 0.0185 0.4640 0.0161
256 misleading-extreme 0.4700 0.0355 0.4654 0.0259
256 misleading-moderate 0.4690 0.0242 0.4670 0.0167
256 null 0.4355 0.0460 0.4260 0.0388
512 instructive 0.5135 0.0185 0.5123 0.0147
512 irrelevant 0.5080 0.0205 0.5088 0.0147
512 misleading-extreme 0.5010 0.0265 0.5007 0.0233
512 misleading-moderate 0.5065 0.0105 0.5066 0.0127
512 null 0.4590 0.0565 0.4615 0.0389
1024 instructive 0.5375 0.0477 0.5539 0.0406
1024 irrelevant 0.5490 0.0740 0.5690 0.0406
1024 misleading-extreme 0.5350 0.0255 0.5447 0.0304
1024 misleading-moderate 0.5350 0.0467 0.5403 0.0279
1024 null 0.5225 0.0543 0.5353 0.0651
26\n\nG.7 T5 11B, T0 11B, and GPT-3 175B (Figure 6)
model template category median q3 - q1 mean std. dev.
GPT-3 (175B) instructive 0.6534 0.0722 0.6472 0.0429
GPT-3 (175B) irrelevant 0.6101 0.0361 0.6260 0.0326
GPT-3 (175B) misleading-extreme 0.6173 0.0072 0.6217 0.0143
GPT-3 (175B) misleading-moderate 0.6498 0.0578 0.6318 0.0480
T5 LMA (11B) instructive 0.6679 0.1462 0.6797 0.0823
T5 LMA (11B) irrelevant 0.6426 0.0776 0.6368 0.0488
T5 LMA (11B) misleading-extreme 0.5993 0.0794 0.6070 0.0619
T5 LMA (11B) misleading-moderate 0.5957 0.1137 0.6072 0.0653
T5 LMA (11B) null 0.5560 0.0442 0.5578 0.0332
T0 (11B) instructive 0.7942 0.0623 0.7959 0.0392
T0 (11B) irrelevant 0.7906 0.0632 0.7942 0.0384
T0 (11B) misleading-extreme 0.7401 0.0650 0.7338 0.0496
T0 (11B) misleading-moderate 0.7942 0.0397 0.7858 0.0356
T0 (11B) null 0.6986 0.0695 0.6847 0.0484
T0++ (11B) instructive 0.8321 0.0316 0.8319 0.0282
T0++ (11B) irrelevant 0.8267 0.0433 0.8207 0.0323
T0++ (11B) misleading-extreme 0.8051 0.0614 0.8029 0.0593
T0++ (11B) misleading-moderate 0.8159 0.0487 0.8039 0.0333
T0++ (11B) null 0.7509 0.0505 0.7379 0.0362
27\n\nH Results of Individual Templates
H.1 ALBERT
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} If bonito flakes boil more than a few seconds, the stock becomes too strong? "{hypothesi
{premise} Inflections are annoying and thank god that Middle English got rid of most of them. "{hy
{premise} Is the pious loved by the gods because it is pious? Or is it pious because it is loved by the
{premise} Single-family zoning is bad for American cities. "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} When Bolyai sent Gauss his discovery of non-Euclidean geometry, Gauss replied that he 
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 17: ALBERT with all irrelevant templates and the aggregated instructive for reference.
28\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} Are there lots of similar words in "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} Can that be paraphrased as: "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} Can that be summarized as "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} Do most of the above words appear in the following passage? {hypothesis} {mask}
{premise} Does that have the same meaning as "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 18: ALBERT with all misleading-moderate templates and the aggregated instructive for reference.
29\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} Does the paragraph start with "the"? {hypothesis} {mask}
{premise} Is the sentiment positive? {hypothesis} {mask}
{premise} Is this French? {hypothesis} {mask}
{premise} Is this a sports news? {hypothesis} {mask}
{premise} Is this grammatically correct? {hypothesis} {mask}
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 19: ALBERT with all misleading-extreme templates and the aggregated instructive for reference.
30\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
Given that {premise} Does it follow that "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
Given that {premise} Therefore, it must be true that "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
Given {premise} Is it guaranteed true that "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
Given {premise} Should we assume that "{hypothesis}" is true? {mask}
Suppose {premise} Can we infer that "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} question: {hypothesis} Yes or no? answer: {mask}
{premise} Are we justified in saying that "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} Based on the previous passage, is it true that "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} Question: Does this imply that "{hypothesis}"? {mask}
{premise} Using only the above description and what you know about the world, "{hypothesis}" is d
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 20: ALBERT with all instructive templates.
31\n\nH.2 T0 (3B)
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} If bonito flakes boil more than a few seconds, the stock becomes too strong? "{hypothesi
{premise} Inflections are annoying and thank god that Middle English got rid of most of them. "{hy
{premise} Is the pious loved by the gods because it is pious? Or is it pious because it is loved by the
{premise} Single-family zoning is bad for American cities. "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} When Bolyai sent Gauss his discovery of non-Euclidean geometry, Gauss replied that he 
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 21: T0 (3B) with all irrelevant templates and the aggregated instructive for reference.
32\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} Are there lots of similar words in "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Can that be paraphrased as: "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Can that be summarized as "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Do most of the above words appear in the following passage? {hypothesis}
{premise} Does that have the same meaning as "{hypothesis}"?
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 22: T0 (3B) with all misleading-moderate templates and the aggregated instructive for reference.
33\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} Does the paragraph start with "the"? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is the sentiment positive? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is this French? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is this a sports news? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is this grammatically correct? {hypothesis}
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 23: T0 (3B) with all misleading-extreme templates and the aggregated instructive for reference.
34\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
Given that {premise} Does it follow that "{hypothesis}"?
Given that {premise} Therefore, it must be true that "{hypothesis}"?
Given {premise} Is it guaranteed true that "{hypothesis}"?
Given {premise} Should we assume that "{hypothesis}" is true?
Suppose {premise} Can we infer that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} question: {hypothesis} Yes or no? answer:
{premise} Are we justified in saying that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Based on the previous passage, is it true that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Question: Does this imply that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Using only the above description and what you know about the world, "{hypothesis}" is d
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 24: T0 (3B) with all instructive templates.
35\n\nH.3 T5 LM-Adapted (3B)
4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} If bonito flakes boil more than a few seconds, the stock becomes too strong? "{hypothesi
{premise} Inflections are annoying and thank god that Middle English got rid of most of them. "{hy
{premise} Is the pious loved by the gods because it is pious? Or is it pious because it is loved by the
{premise} Single-family zoning is bad for American cities. "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} When Bolyai sent Gauss his discovery of non-Euclidean geometry, Gauss replied that he 
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 25: T5 LM-Adapted (3B) with all irrelevant templates and the aggregated instructive for reference.
36\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} Are there lots of similar words in "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Can that be paraphrased as: "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Can that be summarized as "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Do most of the above words appear in the following passage? {hypothesis}
{premise} Does that have the same meaning as "{hypothesis}"?
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 26: T5 LM-Adapted (3B) with all misleading-moderate templates and the aggregated instructive for refer-
ence.
37\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
aggregated instructive templates
{premise} Does the paragraph start with "the"? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is the sentiment positive? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is this French? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is this a sports news? {hypothesis}
{premise} Is this grammatically correct? {hypothesis}
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 27: T5 LM-Adapted (3B) with all misleading-extreme templates and the aggregated instructive for refer-
ence.
38\n\n4 8 16 32 64 128 256
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
Given that {premise} Does it follow that "{hypothesis}"?
Given that {premise} Therefore, it must be true that "{hypothesis}"?
Given {premise} Is it guaranteed true that "{hypothesis}"?
Given {premise} Should we assume that "{hypothesis}" is true?
Suppose {premise} Can we infer that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} question: {hypothesis} Yes or no? answer:
{premise} Are we justified in saying that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Based on the previous passage, is it true that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Question: Does this imply that "{hypothesis}"?
{premise} Using only the above description and what you know about the world, "{hypothesis}" is d
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 28: T5 LM-Adapted (3B) with all instructive templates.
39\n\nI Zero-Shot Results (Figure 5)
model category template name accuracy
T0 (3B) instructive MNLI_YN 0.7148
T0 (3B) instructive GPT_YN 0.6823
T0 (3B) instructive justiﬁed_in_saying 0.6426
T0 (3B) instructive should_assume 0.6498
T0 (3B) instructive is_it_true 0.6462
T0 (3B) instructive guaranteed_true 0.6209
T0 (3B) instructive can_we_infer 0.6354
T0 (3B) instructive does_it_follow 0.6715
T0 (3B) instructive does_this_imply 0.6679
T0 (3B) instructive modal_be_true 0.6354
T0 (3B) misleading-moderate words_appear 0.6462
T0 (3B) misleading-moderate similar_words 0.6354
T0 (3B) misleading-moderate same_meaning 0.6968
T0 (3B) misleading-moderate paraphrase 0.6390
T0 (3B) misleading-moderate summarize 0.6462
T0 (3B) misleading-extreme start_with_the 0.6968
T0 (3B) misleading-extreme grammatical 0.6859
T0 (3B) misleading-extreme sentiment 0.6462
T0 (3B) misleading-extreme sportsball 0.6426
T0 (3B) misleading-extreme french 0.5668
T0 (3B) irrelevant zoning 0.5704
T0 (3B) irrelevant gauss 0.5523
T0 (3B) irrelevant katsuobushi 0.5668
T0 (3B) irrelevant inﬂection 0.6751
T0 (3B) irrelevant euthyphro 0.6606
T0 (3B) null concat_PHM 0.6426
T0 (3B) null concat_HPM 0.6029
model category template name accuracy
T0 (11B) instructive MNLI_YN 0.8051
T0 (11B) instructive GPT_YN 0.8014
T0 (11B) instructive justiﬁed_in_saying 0.7112
T0 (11B) instructive should_assume 0.7437
T0 (11B) instructive is_it_true 0.8051
T0 (11B) instructive guaranteed_true 0.6968
T0 (11B) instructive can_we_infer 0.7690
T0 (11B) instructive does_it_follow 0.7509
T0 (11B) instructive does_this_imply 0.8014
T0 (11B) instructive modal_be_true 0.6895
T0 (11B) misleading-moderate words_appear 0.7184
T0 (11B) misleading-moderate similar_words 0.7148
T0 (11B) misleading-moderate same_meaning 0.7256
T0 (11B) misleading-moderate paraphrase 0.7256
T0 (11B) misleading-moderate summarize 0.6679
T0 (11B) misleading-extreme start_with_the 0.6823
T0 (11B) misleading-extreme grammatical 0.6390
T0 (11B) misleading-extreme sentiment 0.6318
T0 (11B) misleading-extreme sportsball 0.5921
T0 (11B) misleading-extreme french 0.5271
T0 (11B) irrelevant zoning 0.6318
T0 (11B) irrelevant gauss 0.5560
T0 (11B) irrelevant katsuobushi 0.5740
T0 (11B) irrelevant inﬂection 0.7004
T0 (11B) irrelevant euthyphro 0.6931
T0 (11B) null concat_PHM 0.6570
T0 (11B) null concat_HPM 0.6209
T0++ (11B) instructive MNLI_YN 0.8592
T0++ (11B) instructive GPT_YN 0.8231
T0++ (11B) instructive justiﬁed_in_saying 0.7726
T0++ (11B) instructive should_assume 0.8231
T0++ (11B) instructive is_it_true 0.8556
T0++ (11B) instructive guaranteed_true 0.8231
T0++ (11B) instructive can_we_infer 0.8303
T0++ (11B) instructive does_it_follow 0.7798
T0++ (11B) instructive does_this_imply 0.8664
T0++ (11B) instructive modal_be_true 0.8087
T0++ (11B) misleading-moderate words_appear 0.7076
T0++ (11B) misleading-moderate similar_words 0.7329
T0++ (11B) misleading-moderate same_meaning 0.7545
T0++ (11B) misleading-moderate paraphrase 0.7617
T0++ (11B) misleading-moderate summarize 0.6968
T0++ (11B) misleading-extreme start_with_the 0.6498
T0++ (11B) misleading-extreme grammatical 0.7762
T0++ (11B) misleading-extreme sentiment 0.7365
T0++ (11B) misleading-extreme sportsball 0.5307
T0++ (11B) misleading-extreme french 0.4838
T0++ (11B) irrelevant zoning 0.5018
T0++ (11B) irrelevant gauss 0.5090
T0++ (11B) irrelevant katsuobushi 0.4801
T0++ (11B) irrelevant inﬂection 0.7220
T0++ (11B) irrelevant euthyphro 0.6715
T0++ (11B) null concat_PHM 0.6426
T0++ (11B) null concat_HPM 0.6029
40\n\nJ Comparison of LM targets, Controlling for the Template
3 5 10 20 30 50 100 250 2490
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
LM Targets
yes;no
write;sleep
cake;piano
she;he
Mary;John
true;false
no;yes
cat;dog
good;bad
the;a
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 29: The best performing irrelevant prompt for ALBERT, {premise} Single-family zoning is
bad for American cities. "{hypothesis}"? [mask] with all LM targets.
41\n\n3 5 10 20 30 50 100 250 24900.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
LM Targets
yes;no
write;sleep
good;bad
true;false
cake;piano
no;yes
Mary;John
the;a
cat;dog
she;he
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 30: The best-performing misleading prompt for ALBERT, {premise} Does the paragraph
start with "the"? [mask] "{hypothesis}" with all LM targets.
42\n\n3 5 10 20 30 50 100 250 2490
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
LM Targets
yes;no
good;bad
no;yes
she;he
write;sleep
Mary;John
true;false
cake;piano
cat;dog
the;a
Number of Shots
RTE Validation Accuracy
Figure 31: The best-performing null prompt for ALBERT, {premise} [mask] "{hypothesis}" with all
LM targets.
43\n\nK Preliminary Results on HANS
Figure 32: Few-shot RTE-trained ALBERT’s zero-shot performance on HANS (McCoy et al., 2019). L = lexical,
S = subsequence, C = constituency. E = true label is entailment. N = true label is non-entailment. Apologies but
note the template category colors are different from those in the main text. “Intuitive” = instructive templates. In
general, models perform similarly with instructive and irrelevant templates, but models with misleading templates
fare worse, especially for lexical non-entailment cases (LN, fourth row). A full analysis will be furnished in a
future version of this paper.
44\n\nL Preliminary Results on Winograd
category template accuracy
instructive Is “{pronoun}" the same as {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6538
instructive Does “{pronoun}" refer to {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6731
instructive Is “{pronoun}" {referent}? Yes or No? 0.5385
instructive Should “{pronoun}" be {referent}? Yes or No? 0.5962
instructive Does “{pronoun}" mean {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6442
instructive Is“{pronoun}" equivalent to {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6058
instructive Does “{pronoun}" stand for {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6346
instructive Can the pronoun “{pronoun}" be replaced with {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6250
misleading-extreme Did “{pronoun}" eat cakes with {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6346
misleading-extreme Is “{pronoun}" mother of {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6346
misleading-extreme Was “{pronoun}" friend to {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6058
misleading-extreme Did “{pronoun}" marry {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6346
misleading-extreme Can “{pronoun}" rent a car with {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6346
misleading-extreme Should “{pronoun}" be brother of {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6346
misleading-extreme Did “{pronoun}" speak to {referent}? Yes or No? 0.5673
misleading-extreme Is “{pronoun}" cousins with {referent}? Yes or No? 0.6154
instructive misleading-extreme
0.54
0.56
0.58
0.6
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68 category
instructive
misleading-extreme
category
score
Figure 33: Zero-shot accuracy of T0 on Winograd Schema Challenge (Levesque et al., 2012; SuperGLUE version).
We ﬁnd no statistically signiﬁcant difference between instructive and misleading-extreme templates.
45